Syllabus
========

**Welcome**! Welcome to CSC 1254, Advanced Programming with C++.  In this
course you will learn about advanced programming practices, object-oriented
programming, abstract data types, and advanced algorithms.

**Note**. You are responsible for understanding and being able to apply the
information in this syllabus and all documents in the ``info/`` folder of the
course repository.  A lack of knowledge of the guidelines presented in these
documents is no defense for violations thereof!  You may, at any time, be
tested on information in these documents for credit.



Grade Breakdown
===============

::

  Practice       1   x   32   =    32     (03.125%)
  Prelim         1   x   32   =    32     (03.125%)
  Homeworks      5   x   64   =   320     (31.25%)
  Tests          2   x  160   =   320     (31.25%)
  Final          1   x  256   =   256     (25%)
   
  Total                       =  1024     (100%)


You have a preliminary exam on Wednesday, February 18, and a practice
assignment due on Sunday, February 15 at 6:00 PM.  The preliminary exam covers
everything in the ``info/`` folder of this repository, and the practice
homework will acquaint you with the server.  Combined, they are worth 6.25% of
your final grade.  

Note that these are due before the first drop date.  Their purpose is to make
sure you are set with logistics before you commit to the course.  If you score
unsatisfactorily, you may want to take the course at another time.



Resources
=========

**Textbook**. We have none. I will expect you to be able to use the advanced
features of a search engine.  If you would like a more linear resource, I
recommend the textbook youw ere using from your last class.  For an on-line
tutorial, cplusplus.com.  I have no further recommendations for such resources;
your choice of resources is a personal decision.

**Notes**. I will also put lecture notes on GitHub (see ``info/git.rst``).



Availability
============

**Office availability**. My office is LDMC 1077 and my hours are T/Th
12:30-2:00.  A student may make an appointment, but should specify a time and a
duration (on the 30-minute mark).  The student should honor the duration if
another appointed student arrives.  An appointed student will take precedence
over any who walk in.  Office hours end promptly.

**E-mail availability**.  I am only available via e-mail M-Th, 10:00 - 4:00 PM.
If an e-mail is sent outside of these times, it will be read at the next
available opportunity.  E-mails sent outside these times, but before assignment
deadlines, are no defense for grade deductions for errors in the assignment,
whether for logistical or other problems.

E-mail should be purposeful and clear.  If a question is asked which can be
answered clearly by anything in the ``info/`` directory, the question may be
ignored.  If asking for help on a problem, the e-mail should state which
problem, and should explain the issue clearly.



Notes
=====

**Experience**.  You need to have taken the prerequisites for this course, and
have mastered the material, regardless of what grade you earned or your
particular experiences in the prerequisite courses.
